---
pubDate: "2017-07-25T08:44:00+0200"
title : "Restructuring Sokomand"
description : "The process of refactoring"
weight : 10
tags: 
    - libgdx
    - rambling
---

## Wrangling a Prototype

Before the Weekend, I created a small little prototype of a sokoban clone. I
worked reasonably fast and after some tilemap headaches, I simply implemented my
own quick and dirty version of a tilemap and map utilities. I then went off to
the weekend and came back yesterday to find code that was inefficient, nigh
unreadable at times, incredibly coupled and almost impossible to make changes
to. I suppose that is the price for trying to crank something out fast, but I
would still like to get better at avoiding such a thing earlier on.

What I did was to try to find ways that I could at least decouple the whole
thing a little and try to make it more manageable. A began by scrapping my
cobbled together tilemap attempts - they worked but used unwieldy 2d arrays for
map storage and access, without ever implementing an actual datastructure for
it. And before I started reinventing the wheel, I simply adapted my code to the
libgdx tilemap - turns out its relatively easy when you have a rough base to
work from. All my entities are now also cells in this tilemap and I can thus
easily use the tilemap features for quick access, efficient storage and easy
rendering.

This allowed me to also add some quality of life changes like being able to
resize the app without everything breaking and adding a rudimentary user
interface to change levels and restart when you messed up. For now it's not only
not much to look at but does not even have too much functionality - but this can
change quickly with the ease of creating gui with the VisUI library and its
kotlin extensions.

Finally, I also finished a first version of a file importer. This allows me to
pull the levels directly from a text file and recreate them dynamically, reuse
them when I want and extend the game simply by adding a txt file to its
directory. The parser is still very much prototype-quality code and highly
coupled but if I get around to it, I could see writing a more universal importer
that can also pull from the web directly (there are a lot of sokoban levels out
there).

I will unfortunately not have much time to work on the program this week, but
may find a few minutes here or there.
When the UI is in a workable state and most of the outstanding bugs are
squashed, I may finally think about adapting the user input to the command
pattern (the reason for this game's very existence) and try to see how I could
for example use it to create replays or integrate an undo function. At the same
time, it would be about time to integrate some tests to avoid breaking
everything via regressions when refactoring. Oh well, still so much to do, so
little time. Somehow this grew larger than the tiny prototype I wanted to use it
as at the beginning.
