---
pubDate: "2017-07-22T08:27:00+0200"
title: "Commanding Sokoban"
description: "Attempts at understanding the Command Pattern"
weight: 10
tags:
  - libgdx
  - rambling
---

[gamepcommand]: (http://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/command.html)

## Creating a Sokoban Clone

Yesterday, I attempted to write a fast little clone of Sokoban to apply and
understand the benefits of a [Command Pattern][gamepcommand]. Unfortunately, I
got bogged down by the details of the _game_ implementation before I ever got a
chance to play around with the pattern itself.

I wanted to use libgdx's builtin TiledMap classes to facilitate having a fast
representation of where what is and saw that it already implemented Tiles,
Layers, Cells, and an overall Map. However, I do think if I am to use this
feature of the library again, I will have to dedicate a whole prototype just to
understanding its own inner workings. I almost did yesterday. What I wanted was
as follows:

You have a player object, that can be moved with the keyboard via the direction
keys. There are pushable objects on the map that need to be pushed onto goals
and walls surround you. Everything only ever moves along the grid. Sounds
incredibly simple, right? Well, I had an awful time finagling my way around the
actual implementation with the help of TiledMapTiledLayers and
StaticTiledMapTiledTiles and whatever else it threw at me. Of course, I am just
kidding. Libgdx is an awesome library and me not understanding the ideas behind
one of its implementations does not signal the library's lack of usefulness -
just my ineptitude.

{{<video mp4="/2017-07-22/Sokomand-2017-07-22_15.01.06.mp4">}}

## The Tilemap

The whole tilemap part of the library consists of many different moving parts
that you have to fit together to make work. You begin by creating a Map object.
Then you add layers to the object. The layers all have different sizes and can
even contains tiles of different sizes (which seems very intriguing). Then you
fill the the layer with individual cells, which are really just there to hold
Tiles, which are the maps way of representing TextureRegions. So far, so good. I
began hacking away. I did not realize a few key things however; Cells really
_only_ existed to contain textures (and whether they would have to flipped or
not), not even their position was kept within. There was also no way to query
the tilelayer for the positional information of individual cells. And cells,
especially empty one would probably be re-used by the system to save on memory.

An incredible amount of overkill for my purposes, which I did not recognize
until I was in way too deep. But, what is overkill for me is presumably very
much appreciated for more complex efforts at creating something else - a
platformer that is not constrained to the grid, tilemaps with animations,
Different layers interacting with each other and so on.

What I ended up doing was coding almost an entire system for tilemaps working
_beside_ the original one. Don't do that. I started copying position values from
one to the other, I checked tilemaps for collision with my own system and made
changes to the cells with the library. Really, I should have either committed to
the library's way of doing this wholly, or just implemented my very simple
version of it from the get-go. Hopefully, I can salvage the working parts of it
to finish up this weekend - because the idea of a simple Sokoban game actually
sounds nice, and I got a working file importer and parser going, which would
pull in levels from text files, or maybe even the internet. And maybe I can
finally further my understanding of the Command Pattern, which was the purpose
of this whole exercise in the first place.

{{<video mp4="/2017-07-22/Sokomand-2017-07-22_15.02.17.mp4">}}

In the meantime - if you decide to use libgdx tilemaps: Don't be a fool like me
and miss MapObjects. They're important.
